Hi, my name's Nick Pratap. I'm a pediatric anesthesiologist. This is what I get paid to do,
taking care of kids having procedures done to their hearts. So you might ask, what am I doing
standing in front of you all here today at PositConf? And it's a good question. So I'd like
to tell you today about my self-guided journey into data science. I'd like to offer some shout
out to some influences and sources of help that I've had along the way. I'd also like to maybe
provide a little bit of encouragement to anybody who's on a similar path to me, or perhaps even
if you know somebody or come across somebody that's on that kind of a path. So the backstory
is that in 2011, I came from London to Cincinnati to learn about quality improvement in healthcare
at Cincinnati Children's Hospital, which is renowned for that kind of work. And they asked
me to work on surgery cancellation. Immediately, I could find out that about 5% of procedures were
cancelled on the day of surgery. And this actually equated to about 5% of operating time as well,
which is important because a lot of the billing is based on time. So through this, we found out
that the problem of surgery cancellation probably cost about $100,000 a week in terms of potential
lost revenue, which is a lot of money. But just taking a more human side to it, it was really
difficult and frustrating for families and for staff as well. So I'd just like to take a moment
to put surgery cancellation in terms of some dimensions of quality, which is what's from the
Institute of Medicine, which is what people often talk about in healthcare quality.
Even I didn't know until I came across this paper that about 30% of the global burden of disease
needs surgery or other procedures under anaesthesia, either for working it up or
for actually treating. So clearly, if surgery is cancelled, the effectiveness of that procedure
is not going to be realised. I touched already on family-centredness, but I'd like to just mention
a paper from more than 20 years ago from another major children's hospital.
They found out that many families drive tens or even hundreds of miles to get to the local
children's hospital. They often have to pay for accommodation. They have to get childcare for
their other children. Mostly, they're taking time off work and more often than not, that's unpaid.
So when the surgery is cancelled, it's probably not surprising that they're quite emotional and
even angry on many occasions. Timeliness, clearly, if the surgery doesn't go ahead and
has to be rescheduled, then it's not being provided in a timely fashion. Efficiency,
I already touched on that, and the other one that they always talk about is equitability,
and at the point when we started this, we really didn't know what the impact was.
So why does children's surgery get cancelled? The number one cause is patient illness.
So with the kids, it's usually coughs, colds, diarrhoea, vomiting, things that give you a fever,
which means it's not safe to go ahead with the procedure. The second cause is no-show.
They don't turn up. The third most frequent we call NPO violation. So in order to have safe
anaesthesia, you need to have an empty stomach before we begin, and so we give instructions
about when they can safely eat and drink and when they have to stop, and if those are not followed,
then we can't go ahead with the procedure. So we did a few cross-the-board interventions to
try and reduce our surgery cancellation rate. We came up with some new, more colourful
instructions for families with some pictures on of when it was okay to eat and what particular
things were okay at particular times, when to show up. We sent out some text message reminders.
And finally, we set up a process that if the pre-op nurses having a phone call a couple of
days beforehand had any inkling that the kid was sick, then they would have a process to discuss
it with our nurse practitioners and therefore try and avoid cancellation on the day by rescheduling
in advance. So we tested all these interventions, and then we rolled them out across the hospital.
We were pretty happy that we succeeded in saving about over an hour a day, which was about 17% of
the time, and that was good. But I'm a perfectionist, and so I wanted to work out why
people were still cancelling. And also really being curious about this no-show, the second
most common. So these were people that families didn't arrive, they didn't answer the
phone when we tried to get hold of them, so we just really didn't know what was going on.
A lot of my colleagues had opinions. One of the myths that I was told a lot was that dental
patients are the worst for not showing up. So that was kind of interesting, and actually kind of
relevant, because if there was some problem in the dental surgery department that they really weren't
preparing the families properly, they weren't giving them the right instructions,
we ought to be able to learn from another department that was informing their families
better, and therefore be able to help with this situation. I didn't know what to do,
but I did feel that we needed data. W. Edward Stemming is the guru of quality improvement.
He said, in God we trust, all others must bring data. So he's the first of my influences.
But what sort of data? So please don't try and read my red slides, they're just to show you
the morass of overwhelming information that we were trying to deal with. So we did some
brainstorming, the things that are in the electronic medical record, like what things
could potentially be associated with cancellation. We came up with a lot, as you can see. We even
looked outside the medical record, we wondered about the weather, so we got weather data from
the local airport, which keep good records. I didn't know what to do with this, this was too
much. You may notice my pictures so far have all been in Excel. Microsoft Excel was not going to
solve this problem for me. I had a little bit of experience with computers, back from when I was
nine. My father bought me this computer, and it had one kilobyte of memory, and I learned programming
basic. From that I have an appreciation of concise and efficient code, but it really was not going to
help me too much at this point. By the way, Sir Clive Sinclair invented this, also Sir Britt,
who came up with the electric car before Elon Musk. Who did? Fortunately, I found somebody who
was able to help me, or at least his writing. The idea of tidy data was really helpful to me,
and I started trying to wrangle some of this data we were getting. This was a long time ago,
so I was using Cliar, and later on the Tidyverse. I didn't use this book because it hadn't been
written then, but I would strongly recommend for anybody at this point now, Alpha Data Science is
an amazing book. So, I started to do what I now know, but didn't then, would be called exploratory
data analysis. So, this is ggplot. I've graduated a little bit further forward. I wanted to look at
cancellations over time. Was there any seasonality to the cancellation rate, and it seemed that there
was, because we've got some variation there. Why could that be? Well, I mentioned patient illness
as being the most important cause, and I wondered, I got some data from the
hospital's laboratory databases about the tests that were positive for some of the infections that
we know kids get, you know, viral type stuff, and there was also some variation going on, and it seemed
to my quick look to be kind of similar. So, I started to realize I was going to need to model
cancellations. Just to go back briefly to quality improvement, we know that when you're able to
predict something, you might be able to prevent it. So, in this case, we thought we could target support
to at-risk families if we knew who was at risk. We did a little bit of psychological research
to try and help, so we knew what sort of interventions we could try. Also, we felt that prediction might
help us with mitigation. So, if we had an idea in advance that particular OR slots might be
opened up because the families wouldn't show up, then we could slip in some like short notice
emergency cases. I also had a hope that I might be able to understand cancellation by developing a
model for it. So, at this point, the most important influence came to me, influencer, I should say.
It was actually an August, very hot August Sunday. My daughter was just starting at kindergarten,
and they had an event where the families could get together and meet each other, and I met
Emily's mum. So, the mother of one of the other kids in my daughter's class, it turned out that
we got chatting. It turned out that she had done a PhD in physics, but now she was taking her
knowledge of machine learning that she learned from looking at galaxies and things like that
to healthcare. I told her somehow about the problem I was working on, and she said, you know,
you need to do machine learning. I thought, well, I don't know. She said, you're a smart guy. You
can do this. So, I thought, okay. So, I did start to do a bit of reading, and I realized that patient
level cancellation prediction is a machine learning problem. She was right. It was supervised
learning. There was a binary classification of cancelled or completed. I realized there were
some specific challenges. One of them, like I told you, there's like four or five percent
cancellation rate, so there's some class imbalance. Anyway, at this point, I was fortunate to come
across the applied predictive modeling book by Max Kuhn, and through that, the carrot package,
I wish tidy models had been available in those days, but that really got me started,
and I was able to actually do some machine learning. Another slide I don't want you to
really look at in detail, but following Max's advice from his book, I was able to set up a
fairly standard training pipeline, and we used fairly standard algorithms, and we got some
useful data. Again, just want to show you the complexity. My next slide, I'm going to show you
some of the conclusions. So, we wanted to find some actionable insights from this patient level
prediction. The first thing I discovered was actually it was good enough for risk stratification.
We got pretty good models, especially for the second and third causes, the no-show and MPO
violation. The patient illness was rather more difficult to predict, and perhaps that's unsurprising
because kids do get sick. What we found was that the strongest predictor was if patients
had cancelled for surgery before. Importantly, we found out that kids who came from socioeconomically
disadvantaged backgrounds were at the highest risk of cancellation, and so going back to when
I was talking about the Institute of Medicine's dimensions of quality, it turns out that surgery
cancellation is an important contributor to disparities in access to surgical care.
In the Cincinnati area, interestingly, this is confounded by race, and this is a point that I want
to come back to in a moment. What was very important to discover is that cancellation
wasn't really the fault of any one particular surgical specialty as such. It was really down
to the demographics of their patient populations, and this enabled me to go back to this cancellation
myth, dental patients are the worst for not showing up. Well, they are in the sense of their
backgrounds, but it's not something that the dental service is responsible for, and this takes me on
to another potential myth. It's always patients from northern Kentucky. Now, if you don't know
the area of Cincinnati, I didn't when I moved there from London, this is a Google map. You can
see the hospital in the middle. Although the city of Cincinnati itself is squarely within Ohio,
a good proportion of the greater Cincinnati region, a bit below the river at the bottom there,
is in northern Kentucky, so that's what we're talking about. Now, we come on to another
important influence for me. John Snow, a fellow Brit, is an amazing man for pioneering two
things that are now quite close to my heart. First of all, anesthesia safety, but secondly,
epidemiology. You might have heard the story about how he mapped cholera cases in London,
identified that one particular well was at the centre of where the cases were,
they removed the handle from the well, and the cholera cases went away. At least this is the way
they told the story. So, I wanted to do some plotting too. Moved on a little bit with my
R skills at this point. I started plotting cancellation rates by zip codes, and you can
see the highest rates are in red here. So, yes, the northern Kentucky patients, there is an area of
northern Kentucky that's a hot spot, but actually there are hot spots in other parts as well.
So, another myth that we were able to bust.
Moving on a little bit further, I started taking a slightly different approach. Now, I've got the
same data effectively in the left-hand panel here. So, this time I've moved into actually
looking at something more granular than zip codes, because I realised zip codes were actually not a
good idea. You can see that there is a heavy cluster of cancellation in the middle of the
panel there. We also wanted to look at some stuff that we'd used before for the medical record.
So, like the race in the middle panel, and also who was paying for the surgery, which was a marker
of socioeconomic disadvantage on the right-hand side. What was interesting looking at this is that
there was more similarity between race and cancellations than there was with poverty as such.
Now, I wanted to know more, and I couldn't get any more data out of the medical record. So,
actually, like our first speaker today, I used tidy census to pull a lot of data from the American
Community Survey and was able to find out a lot more about the neighbourhoods in which families live.
From this, we were able to set up some machine learning models of cancellation rate in a
geospatial sense. The areas in red hatching here are where the middle model gives a pretty
good prediction, and basically that covers most of the densely populated area of Cincinnati.
From this, we're able to find out a whole lot more about the neighbourhoods where
patients with high cancellation rates were living. And again, I'm going to just go through that a
little bit more. So, first of all, we did find that American Community Survey data did help us
compared to things that weren't available in the patient chart. We found that affected families
tend to live in dense urban neighbourhoods with low literacy levels. They're often very close to
the hospital campus, so offering a ride could be quite cost-effective because it would only be for
a mile or two. We found that African-American families were disproportionately affected,
which seemed to fit with what we found before. We realised that we could potentially improve
the cultural competency of our communications with Black families. We also found that our
communications with non-native speakers of English were actually not a great problem
in the Cincinnati area, so our interpreting service was doing a great job.
So, just to conclude, on a whim, in I think 2013, I downloaded RStudio because there was
no financial barrier to entry. A lot of things have happened. I was lucky to get an R grant,
a federal R grant, which academics know is very sought after. I became a co-advisor to a medical
informatics PhD student. I developed and we disseminated an understanding of children's
surgery cancellation, which I've given you some highlights of just now, and got a couple of
publications out of it. I wanted to take this further and actually reduce cancellation rates,
and I submitted a number of applications, and unfortunately they were not successful,
and then COVID happened. For family reasons, I had to move to the East Coast,
but by this point I'd developed quite a lot of proficiency in R and in data science techniques,
and I was lucky to get a faculty position at the University of Pennsylvania and the Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, and I am continuing research using data science in some different
areas now. Finally, some shout outs and pointers. Along my journey, Google has been my constant
guide. I've used, Fran has been extremely helpful, and early on Stack Overflow was often where I was
directed. R bloggers and various other blog sites have been incredibly helpful, and I've got here
two people who are now positive employees whose blogs I've followed quite a lot in the past.
Increasingly over time, I found more and more online books here through Bookdown, and GitHub
was also incredibly helpful to me. I hope that that's going to be helpful to somebody else in
the future. Thank you. I'm not, and I live in Cincinnati currently, and I can say data or not,
it is always Northern Kentucky. A few questions we have time for. What packages did you use for
that hotspotting graphic that you showed? I remember that was old, so I think I used SP.
Now everything I do geospatial will be ESSA. Okay. Was it difficult getting the data you
needed to answer these medical questions? Were there HIPAA concerns? There were definitely HIPAA
concerns. All the geocoding that I showed you, I actually had to set up. I learned a little bit of
Ruby just to set up a geocoding package, so I didn't have to send stuff out to Google. Okay.
These definitely are worried. And then someone said it looks like a tremendous amount of learning
and work. How long did it take for the results, for you to get the results that you presented today?
That's really kind of like seven years worth. Oh, wow. Okay. Seven or eight years worth.
I think that's all the time that we have for questions. Thank you so much.